---
title: Airtable 
date: 2021-01-25
permalink: /tech/airtable/
toc: true
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Airtable
  order: 27
  parent: Tech
---

[Airtable](https://airtable.com) is a flexible and easy-to-use collaborative spreadsheet. 

Airtable lets you collaboratively build data, and provides an API out of the box. Airtable also manages has a robust [Marketplace](https://airtable.com/universe/category/government-and-politics) of Airtable & community templates for small businesses as well as government agencies.

We explored how Airtable might be used for helping to make government more efficient.

> Airtable has a "sweet spot" of use which is somewhere in between "use Google Sheets because it's easy" & "actually maybe you need to build an app."

* It is definitely more collaborative than sharing an Excel file. 
* It's similar to Google Sheets. The Filtering tool provides a clean and beautiful interface for quickly searching and filtering data. The ability to structure data helps to organize information that has become more complex over time.
* Airtable fills a need for structured, web friendly data for teams without the time or resources to build a full database system. Much of this can be accomplished without code. The most difficult part might be around making decisions about your data and workflows. Fortunately, with Airtable, your team can quickly learn the basics and make many dynamic edits, without requiring any code. From there, if you out-grow Airtable, you will have a structured database that can be migrated to other database solutions.
* A variety of "Views." With single-select fields you can set up Kanban boards. With the Calendar view you can sync any Date field with Google calendar, for example. You can also share views and filtered views with other collaborators bases.
* It provides a tool similar to Google Forms.
* For the paid version, an easy Javascript based scripting language is available. Javascript supports a basic fetch request.
* Slack notifications are easy to configure & "no-code": you can set up field level notifications easily.
* A system of Automations allows email notifications as well as integrations with other services.
* A suite of useful Apps. These include chart visualizations, CSV importers, ability to embed a webpage and more.
* Provides and API with excellent auto-generated documentation. Any CSV you add automatically gets a simple REST API endpoint, even with free accounts. While this is rate limited and might be expensive for high-volume sites, it's incredibly useful for developing small applications. For covid19.ca.gov, we will feed our API endpoints into Github actions, and publish the resulting JSON to our static file server.

We explored how Airtable may be used to help make government processes more efficient.

* PDF file publishing system for state industry guidance — We built a set up Airtable bases that help with interagency communication. This system uses multiple bases connected by Automations to provide visibility in a process of tracking upcoming PDF files.
* [Data dictionary](https://github.com/cagov/data-dictionary-airtable) app script to create auto-generated data dictionaries for any Airtable base. (Internal Github script). Our template of what kind of information is important to share was created by Shivani Bose-Varela from the California State Library California Research Bureau. Additional advice shared by Dr. Cyndi Sims-Part from the National Agriculture Library.

## Some other uses of Airtable for governments

### Office of Digital Innovation
Some ideas we have that will let us explore additional features and integrations of Airtable.

* Review and publish of PDF files to Github from Airtable. This is next on our to-do list.
* Content Design API for Figma - Help designers maintain content data examples for prototypes. We are interested to see how autogenerated API data from tools like Wordpress or Airtable might be fed into design prototypes like Figma using the JSONtoFigma plugin. Live data in design files has been historically difficult to achieve, but any improvements in this area will help with getting higher fidelity prototypes out for user feedback much earlier in the process. So far it seems like this is best for "flat" data, such as feeding content into social media card templates, or for organizing sample data with a team using a CSV file & using Airtable to quickly publish an API.

### Airtable we found used in other governments & civic projects

* [Open data metadata tracking](https://airtable.com/universe/expdzCcK4CSOfLuhD/open-data-management) - The City of San Francisco used Airtable to keep track of open data metadata
* Quickly and easily set up crowd-sourced data sets — The City of Boston used Airtable to generate a crowd-sourced list of [Supporting Black and Brown Owned businesses](https://www.boston.gov/departments/small-business-development/supporting-black-and-brown-owned-businesses ) hosted on boston.gov. Only gotcha with this is that the embedded table display is not very mobile-friendly. (We would recommend trying a "gallery" view in mobile to see if that's any better.)
* A talk from beta.nyc from December 11, 2020 [BetaTalks: Feeding New Yorkers and Improving Food Security with Airtable](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KZqQM0pVDPQ&ab_channel=BetaNYC)
* [CBDB](https://beta.nyc/products/cbdb/) - A database for Community Boards to track community issues.
* [NYC open maps](https://beta.nyc/products/open-maps/)

Other reports that we heard of, but have not tracked down:
* City of Austin
* NYC: "Crowd-sourcing Capital projects"

Thanks so much to Jason Lally (former Chief Digital Officer for the City of San Francisco), Noel Hidalgo (BetaNYC's Executive Director), and Michael Evans (Program Director at Mayor's Office of New Urban Mechanics) for sharing your stories.

## Learn more about how to use Airtable

As we were learning to use Airtable, some features were clearly important to understand.

Here is our quick-start guide to what you might want to learn about to get started with Airtable.

1. Create an Airtable account. It's free to create an account with any email address. (Reminder, it's not free to add collaborators, editors and commentors.)
2. Try out some existing bases to get an idea of what Airtable looks like.
3. CORE CONCEPTS: Base, Table, View, Field. Look to the Airtable guidance and explore "Filters" and "Views".
4. Try importing a CSV file from Excel or Google Sheets.
5. Try exporting a CSV from Airtable. TIP: When you export a view, it exports whatever is currently filtered.

### Tips on collaborating
1. "Lock" any views that are used for Slack notifications and syncing with other bases.
2. Label views that are backend so that teams don't get confused about which view matters. Hopefully Airtable will add ability to show and hide views. One thing we would try next time around would be to create administrative views with an administrator account as "personal" views, which would be hidden by default. This plan would require an extra paid account.
3. Provide some basic training about Airtable and some time to get used to the tool. 
4. Sandboxes: We created sandboxes of our systems for our teams, and this was helpful. However, it's extra work to configure if you have synced bases. Airtable was designed for everyone to be in the same base, but for helping different organizations collaborate, it is easier to maintain locked-down fields in separate bases.

### Tips on configurations
1. Notes on field names: When copying over fields and creating references & look up fields, the field names can get out of control, since the names autogenerate with references to the table they came from. When you share a view, the link to the field name gets broken, so you need to manually update the field names. A script to keep field names could probably be written if needed. 
2. Managing & revising field names. We wrote a "data dictionary" tool that exports all the field into different formats, like printable PDF, Markdown, plain-text and JSON. We are also looking to export to some standardized metadata formats & are speaking with a colleague who is part of a Federal metadata working group. Since field names and statuses may have dozens of copy edits, we recommend exporting your configurations, loading them into a Google Doc, and having a "content freeze" while the team collectively agrees on the field names and statuses, and then updating the system all at once. You should be able to do this with very little code.
3. Backups: Remind your team that Automated backups to another system might not be set up & export CSVs to an archive periodically, or add a script to export data to another system. There is a paid offering from OpenSide that is supposed to do this, or you can write your own.
4. Data Security: If notes are about internal processes, remind everyone that these database are effectively shared and anyone with an account could theoretically create a public API very easily by sharing their data. Be sure that you trust whoever is using your data and remind them to not add sensitive data. 
5. Create a public API: We created an extra account with "read-only" access. The JSON that comes from Airtable can be fed to a static-site file host.
6. Diagrams. There is an Airtable app that automatically shows you all the fields in the system and which fields reference other tables. For visualizing multiple databases, we recommend exporting plain-text via the Data Dictionary tool & then using a diagramming tool like [Mural](https://mural.co) or [Miro](https://miro.com/), or any other tool.
7. Color coding: Our team found it very helpful to color code our databases. 

## Things to know about Airtable

* **Cost** — The top concern expressed by everyone we spoke with is that any collaborators, editors and commentors wishing to filter, comment on or edit data directly must have a paid account. You can share data as read-only for free. This makes it ideal for small teams of collaborators. You can also accept data contributions through a free form, similar to Google Forms. This cost factor limits any usage that might be desired by adding larger teams of collaborators. One work-around is to export data to Google sheets during a "review period" & re-import the data into your dataset as needed.

* **Exported full automated backups are not available.** — Airtable provides "snapshots", and all of the data is accessible by API, and can be pulled this way, but there is not currently a higher level system to export all data as CSV backups.

* **No code based configuration templates.** Airtable has a lot of settings. While you can export all the data and fields, and can also pull information about your database out with the Metadata API, you cannot create a code-based template to build multiple instances, though you can offer your whole base as a template for someone to clone, which may be an easy option in some situations. Some tools, like Wordpress, have the ability to store your configurations in a text file, and from there you can version your configurations in Github, and use that as a way for setting up and maintaining multiple instances.

For administrators, the means there is a little bit less control for keeping instances consistent across organizations, and may require more code to do changes more broadly.

Similarly, configurations for Automations require manual configuration and are difficult to annotate. Their interface is largely "no-code" and can be configured with a little bit of training.

* **FilemakerPro Claris has some similarities to Airtable.** Depending on available knowledge and licenses, you might also want to explore Claris. We have not reviewed Claris. Thanks to archivist Shelly Ray from LA Metro for this recommendation.